Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com
From  dot com. It's
Hansel minutes, A weekly discussion
with web developer, right And
technologist Scott Hanselman. This is
Lawrence Ryan announcing show number 568.
In this episode, Scott talks
with Bert Beckman of forgotten
empires about bringing back the
game age of empires with
new expansion packs after 16
years. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes today. I'm
talking with Bert Beekman from
forgotten empires. How are you?
Very good. Thank you. I
am very happy to be
chatting with you because I
was on the internet a
while back as, as one
does. And in my surfing,
I noticed that there was
a new game out age
of empires to HD the
African kingdoms. And I had
to pause, I had to
pause a minute and I
had to ask myself what
decade we were in, what
is going on? It's 2017.
Yeah, it has been quite
crazy in Asia and Barstool.
And for the last three
years, pretty much, we've seen
three expansions coming out and
every time we get loads
of emails saying like, what,
what year is it? What
what's going on? Why are
still happening? Why is it
still a thing? And, yeah,
it's quite a long story.
Really when we started, I
think three or four years
ago by now we were
working on a phrase. So
after the game had been
out for 15, 13, something
like that here ages and
nobody at that point had
figured out how to add
new civilizations to the game.
And I don't know, some,
some lazy Sunday afternoon, I
was looking around the forums.
I was super curious, like,
has anyone ever managed to
have, you know, civilizations to
agent on Barstool? And I
figured it out, there was
a guy in China and
he was talking on some
kind of forum. And he
said, like, I managed to
add a 19 or 18
in the game at the
civilization to Adrian press. And
that's kind kinda what I
saw. So like 19 SIF
and then a whole bunch
of Chinese science. I don't
speak Chinese at all. So
that was quite challenging. And
I started digging and with
Google translate and then all
the tools he was using,
I was like, okay, we
can do this. We can
add a new sift in
the game. And at that
point we start getting more
people on boards, like people
who could do graphics, people
could make some sounds, maybe
even compose a bit of
music. And I think after
a year that all added
up and accumulated to one
big project and that's at
the same, the very same
time, which we were very
well aware of Microsoft. So
I regained interest in nature.
And so what they did,
they were working on the
HD edition, which is on
esteem and at the very
same moment where we're working
on lot. And so that
kind of came together in
a way like when horrible,
it was released, I think
a month later or something
the HD edition was announced.
And we were like, T
is that, that's an opportunity
there. Like, we have a
lot of new content here.
They have regained interest in
the game. We should figure
out how to work together.
I have to say that
was a long and almost
painful process to get in
touch with Microsoft because you're
just the guy behind the
computer, right? Hands Microsoft is
this big company. And you're
like, how do I talk
to Microsoft? I know that
bill Gates is at Microsoft,
but you don't send a
mail to say, Hey, bill,
we want to do something
with Microsoft. There is no
contact point for us that
was so difficult to get
into. But after a while
we got in touch with
the right people and yeah,
it starts from there. And
he made one expansion that
turns into two expansions. And
then I think last December
we had third expansion horizons,
righteous being released. And then
that's the one that's caught
your eye. And then probably
surprised you're like, why is
this still a thing? Yeah,
the, they actually, the African
kingdoms was the one that
caught me first, but you've
got the forgotten, you've got
the African kingdoms. And then
now you've got rise of
the, of the Rodriguez. So
yes, three, three complete and
massive expansions in a short
period of time, encompassing all
kinds of cultures that we
know. And, and frankly cultures
we didn't see before and
a fairly Eurocentric age of
empires. I I'm, I want
to back up though, cause
you've touched on so many
different things. Microsoft is a
hundred. No, it's great. I
guess there's a 120 830,000
people on a, your point
about trying to find the
right person. I've I find
that there's one person inside
of Microsoft that is super
interested. Whatever you have to
say, you just have to
find that one person and
everyone else has zero interest
in what you have to
say. Let's do it. There's
no middle ground. You know
what I mean? And as
you find that to be
The case as well, we
definitely, definitely you jump through
so many hoops at first.
You're like, Oh yeah, just
talk to that guy, jump,
talk to that guy. And
you jumped around and eventually
you get that guy. If
you're lucky, we were super
lucky because they were on
that project. And we had
a queue to begin with.
We got in touch with
an altar developer of the
original game and he told
us like that that might
be a guy if he's
still around there to, to
kind of start jumping around.
But indeed it's, it's, it's
super difficult to find them
The, the mods are these
hacks or is this like,
are you like, you know,
cause there are mods that
are hacks. Like we like
there's there's mods for doom
where they just swap out
textures. Or did you find
a way to add this
in like the way they
would, It was a mix.
It wasn't mixed there. The
word like this, this was
actually quite an interesting point
about the whole timing. Like
we mentioned before, it's been
16 years since something 15
years and something happens in
the series. A so a
lot of the people who
grew up initially with age
of empires two, they didn't
know there were 10 years
old at the time. Now
they're 20, 26, something like
that. They just came out
of college or a university.
They have a lot of
time on their hands in,
in some cases or they
need to find a new
hobby, a new passion. And
a lot of people just
went back to age, vampire
parts, like a childhood game
and it's kind of debt
environment. That's I met a
lot of people and they,
they suddenly had the skills
to make tools, to edit
the cake, to, to even
hack the game and all
those tools and those hacking
skills combined kind of made
the motto. So it's, it's
a mix off of hacking
and, and, and, and proper
tools in the way that's
ensemble studios. Did it back
in the nineties. What is
it about age of empires
too? That gets people so
nostalgic. I mean, three came
out, you know, maybe 10
years ago and it was
more 3d and more fancy,
but people kind of shrugged,
I feel the same way
about like Diablo two, there's
something about these bitmap based
high Rez, you know, raster
based games that make people
happy. Yeah. I, one of
the things that, that's definitely
a thing is that age
of empires too, was one
of the last I can
massive games in the, to
the environment. And after that,
it went really quick into
treaty. Like, as you mentioned,
street, there were full
blown treaty games, but especially
a different told you was
in treaty. It was in
its infancy at that time.
And if you play it
nowadays, you think like, Oh,
it's still a good game,
but the graphics they look
like, I mean, the lek
is just two polygons, that's
it? While in each vampires
too. If, if, if we
look at the polygon counts
of a unit, that's a
few millions per unit, which
you can never achieve in
a treaty game, indeed it's
then render it out into
a Sprite, which is a
very, very simplified, but the
quality is just so enormously
detailed. And that's the level
of detail that tree D
has. Well, it has called
up by now, but it
took a while to get
there. So I think just
that fact that it's so,
so such a high quality
to T game helps in,
in, in making it H
well, I can say it
like that. It seem a
little bit like in the
early two thousands, mid two
thousands, people were trying to
make three D games just
because they were 3d, just
like when we saw three
D movies and people forgot
that we were at the
peak of the two D
game. At that point, there
was no reason to necessarily
switch to 3d, but they
did it just because they
could, I think so. Yes.
And I mean, it, wasn't
new technology. And by now,
so many games are introduced
and we really have that,
that level where you can
really wow people by, by
just more than the fact
that these three D really
looks impressive, but indeed back
in the days, yeah, it's,
it's, it's just the different,
the capabilities that you can
do, which really into it.
So You started out, you're
a mod, you're a mod
collective, you're a bunch of
fans that like to mod
someone, figures out how to
break into this, you know,
in a, in a kind
of a mod kind of
way. Does this mean that
you install age of empires
two and then you unzip
a bunch of resources on
top of it? Or does
this mean that you're actually
changing binaries Code? We did
change some binary's in the
coats, but we try to
make sure, I mean, at
that point we had no
idea about the legalities of
all the things we were
doing molding. Yeah. It's a
super great legal area. Right?
So we, we did change
the binaries, but indeed you
had to have the old
game installed and then we
provided an installer as well.
And then you could just
kind of add it to
your old game. That's the
way it worked. And is
this something you're doing in,
in the existing tools? Is
it a collection of tools?
Are you in paintbrush and
visual studio, or what are
you building these things in
The, the hacking thing itself
was all in the, with
the hex editor. That was
it, there was this it's,
I can't say enough. There
was one guy who went
in with the hex editor
and he did create his
stuff, like adding a resolution
options, like a HD white
screen. You can even play
it in Fourcade that kind
of stuff. Just with the
hex editor, improving the AI,
like it's, it's now at
least 10 times smarter. And
he did that with the
hex editor. And that guy
is just ridiculously talented and
smart. And I jumped into
the exit to throw myself
a few times and I
managed to do I'm gonna
change the variable and stuff
like that. But I think
new functionality that's I still
don't find Fatima how managed
to do that. That was
incredible. That changed at all.
When you finally got Microsoft
on the phone, did they
say, Oh, well, here you
go. Here's the code? Or
are you still doing it
that way? Oh no. That's
that's that's all in the
past taste. You have to
be worried there. Oh, no,
no, no. That's that is
long gone. Luckily, no, nowadays
the expansions we have the
source code to work with,
and that is a relief.
I mean, the source code,
of course it is. It
is old. It's from 20
years ago, coding practices have
changed quite a bit Lucas.
Oh yes. So when we
first saw some of the
things that were made, we
were like, how, how does
this even work? How you
go around this. But we
were supported at the time
and still are by an
older studio who are helping
us with the coding. Because
I mean, at the time
Microsoft kind of was greeted
by this group of fence
mothers. And we have no
proven or proven experience with
goats. We just had experience
with design and content, and
indeed a bit of Faqih
tacky in the binary files,
but proper coding. So they
gave us a studio to
support that, You know, but
I think that as, as
I think it was Jeff
Atwood who said that, that
one lacks in, in talent,
they make up for, with
enthusiasm. It sounds like you
put together a group that
is just so enthusiastic about
this game. That the little
details, like the code don't,
don't really matter at that
point. Ah, you, you make
a good point there. The
passion is a bit ridiculous
at some time. I mean,
I like it myself. I'm
the, okay. Just, just a
stupid story. Like the way
I got into whole this
age vampire stuff is because
when I was a kid,
I was like, I had
like my little scrap book
and I was writing out
sifts that I wanted to
add to the game. And
I dunno know, a few
years later I was like,
I want to make eight
pound price myself. I want
to make my own age
pen prize game because I
couldn't figure out how to
add to the existing. I
mean, I was 12 years
old back then. So how
the hell would I know?
So I started to learn
about coding and then eventually
I started to study computer
science, yada yada, yada, and
then eventually by, I have
to say a lot of
luck. I ended up working
on H vampires, but it
goes for pretty much everybody
in the team. They were
so I don't know, swallowed
up by the whole game
and they're still so passionate
about it. And indeed it's
like, we don't come to
work and work on age
of empires. We, if it's
the weekend and we want
to make scenario, we make
the scenario and we have
fun making the scenario and
eventually it sold. So it's
the, the passion thing is
definitely there, but I also
totally understand Microsoft that they
were like, yeah, but we
need some kind of industry
experience in there too, to
kind of even give you
some price point for it.
Like they could have just
said, no, they could have
not taken your call. And
that would have been, you
just would have been monitors,
but now this is a
real company. Like this is
for sale. You can go
on steam and it's great.
And I'm running it on
windows 10 and I had
no issues at all. Yeah,
pretty much. That's that's, that's
how it works now. Actually,
it was one of the
first things we had to
like the first hoop we
had to jump through. When
we got in touch with
Microsoft, they were like, yeah,
you need to set up
a company. If you will,
to work with us, we
don't work with individuals in
this kind of a way.
We're like, okay, how do
I set up a company
at that time? I was
still working in the restaurant
or something. So it's, it's,
it's a big jumble on
the seventh. So the game
that got me, the expansion
that I started with that
got me interested in giving
you a call was the,
the African kingdoms. This was
the second new expansion in
age of empires, two in
16 years, it included the
Berbers, the Molly ans the
Ethiopians or Habesha and the
Portuguese. How do you pick,
I mean, Africa's thousands of
tribes, dozens of recognizable tribes.
How do you decide which
of the four for a
game to include as a
civilization? Very good question. Actually,
that's, that's something I've argued
or no targets discussed with
the team for our student
hints. And we still don't
really know what we don't
have a proper process for
that we usually start with.
Okay. What is something really
interesting about something that happened
in that region in that
time? I'll take one example.
The Maldivians they had a
King Mansa, Musa. He was
the richest guy that ever
lived. He was, I don't
know, it's not two words,
but it's like take bill
Gates and do that times
of hundreds. And you have
to work months and Moosa
owns back in the days.
And there were like stories
about him going on, trading
trips through the Sahara, and
then all the regions he
posts true. He had no
idea, no concept of, of
straight and money. He just
had so much money. So
he went to a little
village and he was like,
I want some milk. And
he gave the guy a
boar of gold. And then
all the sudden that guy
was the richest guy in
the whole tribe. And all
those things after that whole
trip he did from Mali
to Cairo. The whole economy
of North Africa was pretty
much collapsed because that guy
just spent his money like
crazy. And those are the
little things that, that make
you interested. Like, Oh wait,
what did I do? And
how did he get so
rich? And what's happened there.
And then you start thinking,
you got the great, great
storyline. And then you're like,
yeah, we have to make
a civilization around this. And
they start thinking like, did
they have military and battles
that they fought? And yeah,
that, that's kind of how
it starts. So when you,
in the traditionally in age
of empires, when you make
a civilization, then there's a
hero or a, like the
boss of that civilization that
you pick and you could
pick a lot of different
ones. We were spending a
lot of times we did
you work with people who
are, has to have historical
context in that civilization. Like,
for example, with the, with
the Ethiopian expansion, you had
Yoda or Judith, who's a
betta Israel queen who basically
like laid waste to them
and the accent might empire.
Like how did you explore
that? And how did you
make sure that it was
something that you would want
to talk about? And maybe
you wouldn't offend modern day.
If you, if you decided
to pick that as a
hero, That's a very good
question. Actually, we had this
happen once in the past,
we were working with Indians
in the forgotten expansion. And
to be, we're talking about
a hero, I can't remember
his name anymore, but we
were developing a storyline. He
was going to be the
great Indian hero. Yeah. They
are the other, at that
point, we also had an
Indian team. It was working
on something unrelated and he,
he saw what we were
doing on the Indian storyline.
And he was like, stop,
don't do that. This is
like making a German campaign
and glorifying Hitler. You don't
do this. I can't remember
what the guy was. We
were very happy that we
had the Indian guy on
the team back in the
day. So, so that's, that's
scales only because you had
a diverse team. Like we
always talk about how diverse
teams, you know, help because
someone can go and say,
Oh, yikes. You know, let's
not do that. But that
only, if you hadn't had
that Indian gentleman on your
team, you would have been
in trouble. How do you
do that now? Do you
take the storylines to colleges
or universities and confirm that
this is a good idea.
Nowadays, we luckily have Microsoft
to fall back on that
we always make restore Alliance.
We did some research ourselves,
but then the effort geo
poll departments to make sure
that there's nothing touchy or
icky in storylines at all.
And they, they go quite
in depth on that. I
don't dunno. We, we, we
touched on something about China
and they're like, Oh, China
making, make sure that's things
with Tibet, China, Taiwan that
you kind of stay away
from the border regions that
are at the moment, a
bit sensitive, stuff like that.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Well, I
can definitely say like, as
a fan of history, like
you've done a lot of
really great historical work and
you, and one could not
only play the game for
hours, but then go about,
go and read about, you
know, the warrior Queens and
Kings for, for hours. I'm
a bit of a historian
around Ethiopian exabyte history and
the whole queen queen Yoda
queen COVID 10th, 10th century
Ady is fascinating. And of
course on the Indian side,
you ended up picking Perth
Faraj. Chohun from, you know,
folk legends in Gujarat, around
the 12th century. You could
read about these and go
on forever. So it was
really, it's cool to play
a great game, but also
to see that you put
a lot of work into
it and you thought about
it, it just makes it,
I don't know, somehow it
makes it more fun. You
know, you could have just
made something up, but you
didn't Indeed it's there, there
was one campaign actually, where
we went a bit more
freestyle, but yeah, there was,
it was the storyline in
the forgotten about the quest
for El Dorado. Yeah. Yeah.
Francisco the Alameda. Yes, indeed.
No, sorry. No, Francisco. Amanda
is the Portuguese Explorer. You
went out the other side
of the globe, the Eldorado,
what's more an exhibition to
the Amazon where the Spanish
were kind of looking for
elders, the city of gold.
And indeed there is not
that much information about that
expedition mainly because they all
died in the end. Sorry
for the spoilers there, but
sorry, I should have said
it before. Sorry. No, anyway,
it's a, I think it's
a 10,000. It's a thousand
year old spoiler. So it's
okay. Pretty much, pretty much.
We're talking about History here.
So we kind of went
a bit more freestyle there,
but indeed generally the campaign
team ever since then, we
really focused on long historical
and then trying to stick
to the history as much
as possible. And that's also
something that I really noticed
too in play the original
campaigns. There was a campaign
in Joan of arc and
you have to, I don't
know, defense Paris or liberate
Paris. I don't remember exactly
what it was. And in,
in history it looks like
they set that they walked
around Paris and then they
conquered in nearby castle and
indeed in the scenario, the
best way to win that
scenario is go around Paris,
take a nearby console and
then continue along your Merry
way. And that was so
nice to discover afterwards, like,
Hey, this is quite well
research. Yeah. It's also nice
that while you could make
stuff up and like you
said, you did in a
couple of instances, history is
sometimes crazy enough that even
the, you know, the stories
that you can just pluck
out of history are almost
good enough for your storyline.
Absolutely. Absolutely. And that's kind
of the basis of age
of empires. It's a game
it's only a history book,
but it's a game mainly
inspired by history. So yeah,
99% of the campaigns are
his historical tales. That's kind
of molded into the game,
but in the end it's
still the history behind. And
interestingly, I've got a nine
year old and an 11
year old and they both
love playing this game and
they will play the game.
Then they want to run
off and read the book.
I know it sounds cliche,
but that's exactly what happens.
They want to learn, you
know, the Mayas and the
Aztecs fight and they go,
Oh, that's fine. That all
about them, you know, or,
or whatever That, that is
fairly nice. I have to
say, that's glad to hear
that the game is still
being played by well, a
completely new generation pretty much.
Yeah, It really is. And
interestingly, they don't say a
word about 3d versus this
or that. And the fact
that you can run it
on a big screen, we're
running it on a 30
inch monitor, you know, more
dots. That's all, they want
more dots. So being able
to run it in four
K is pretty amazing. Yeah.
Oh yeah, absolutely. It's a,
it's, it's quite ridiculous. You
can, you can actually very
nice thing about the HD
edition and I'm not just
stupidly plugging it because we,
weren't only with Austin that
if you played it back
in the day, it wasn't
an 800 by 600 pixels
and you could see your
thousands. And then if you
were lucky to villagers and
now you can see off
your empire. And if you're
lucky on the fourth game
on Lake, or you can
see neighbors as well. It's
ridiculous. That actually brings up
an interesting question from a
processing power perspective, given that
there is probably two orders
of magnitude, maybe three more
processing power, you know, here
you've, you've described a scenario
where you've got four, eight,
12 times more stuff going
on on screen. I assume
that there's more than enough
CPU overhead to be doing
all of that kind of
work. And the game runs,
you know, buttery smooth I
to say that was a,
a long and difficult journey.
Yes, that was ridiculous. The,
the one thing that was
really good well done in
the very original game was
the way that the sprites
and the terrain and everything
was surrendered. It was very
meticulous. It was all done
in assembly codes to make
sure there was absolutely no
overhead at all. So every
pixel was only Truong. If
it had to be drawn,
no overheads, no nothing. And
if you scale it up
from the old, old resolution,
800, 602 to four K,
that still works. And there
was barely any overhead when
the HD edition came out.
Some of those things were
swapped out and there were
some serious performance sets that
was the specifically, the terrain
was done differently. It was
changed from like a two
D rendering system to a
tree. The mesh, I mean,
it still looks like today,
but under the hood was
a tree. Right, Right. In
order to make you have
a texture with a mountains
over the top, Pretty much,
pretty much. And it made
sense at the time to
do that change, but it
kind of backfired. So thinking
through that and optimizing it
to, to, to get to
the level of the original
game that took awhile, but
nowadays it's runs as smooth
as it should be. Nice.
It seems that people respected
performance though, back in the
early nineties. And now, you
know, it's pretty easy to
be spoiled and just throw
a four loop into some
code and not think about
the ramifications of it when
you scale it up. Indeed,
indeed. It was actually ridiculous.
When, when we did go
in with the profiler, it
wasn't, it just a few
careless, four loops. That's where
doing too much work. And
that was, it just took
ages to find it. I
always joke about that. Like,
you know, you're in an
application, I always think of
it as Microsoft outlook, but
it doesn't really matter. I'm
in an application and I'm
in somebody's for-loop and it's
just like, where is that
person? Can I call them?
Can I tell them I'm
stuck in there for a
loop? I can feel it.
I know. So what's about
the future of, of age
of empires. You've got a
studio now you've released three
of them. People can buy
them on steam. They should
go and buy them immediately
after this show because they're
really very well priced value
priced. It's not, not going
to break the bank. Are
you going to keep doing
this until you get tired?
I guess so. So I,
I do remember after the
very first expansion came out,
which is by now three
years ago, I was like,
yeah, this is it. There's
no more room for civilizations
and age of empires to
we've reached the limits. And
yeah, we're, we're too expensive
as it had. So at
this point, I say, never
say never, there was still
room for Mark expansions, if
they're going to happen. I
don't know, but we'd love
to do them. And at
this point we're still actively
supporting the game as well.
We have tournaments going on.
So we are making sure
there are patches balance changes
the things for the really
back fence to keep them
around, to keep them entertained.
Nice. So work like work
continues. Yes. We're definitely not
out of the game yet.
This works on just I'm
saying this because it's true.
I running this on my
surface. I've played it on
airplanes. It runs on my
full desktop. It scales to
darn near any resolution from,
you know, 1,024 up. So
there's really no excuse. Even
a modest machine runs it
very, very nicely. I've had
no issues. I use it
all. Especially if he's play
like the normal games, like
beat up an AI. Totally
fine. It should run on
anything. The main specs that
are specified in store page
are pretty much on point.
Very cool. Yep. And where
can people find you and
your company and, and get
involved and then do they
just Google it too? Yes,
I think so. If you
go to our website, Goldman
empire little nets, I think
on the front page, you
can see all the expansions
with links to the steam
store. So you can find
it there as well. Oh,
that's forgotten empires.net. We'll put
it in the show notes
and we'll tweet it. And
we'll spread the word about
this, this, this passion that
you have built an entire
studio around. And we're thrilled
that you've taken a, a
game that hasn't seen an
expansion in 16 years and
made multiple fantastic expansions. Thanks
for sticking with it. Thanks
a lot for having us.
This has been another episode
of Hansel minutes and I'll
see you again next week.